2_DAY_DBA




tasks:

These tasks include configuring the database, managing memory and
storage, managing users, managing database objects such as tables, performing basic
troubleshooting, creating backups for your database, performance monitoring
activities, and more.
The primary administrative interface used in this guide is Oracle Enterprise Manager
Database Control, featuring all the self-management capabilities introduced in Oracle
Database.





















Oracle Database 2 Day DBA is a database administration quick start guide that teaches
you how to perform day-to-day database administrative tasks. The goal of this book is
to help you understand the concepts behind Oracle Database. It teaches you how to
perform all common administration tasks needed to keep the database operational,
including how to perform basic troubleshooting and performance monitoring
activities.




Audience
Oracle Database 2 Day DBA is for anyone who wants to perform basic administrative
tasks with Oracle Database. Only minimal basic knowledge of or experience with
database management is required, and a basic knowledge of computers.
In particular, this guide is for the following groups of Oracle users:
 	Developers who want to acquire basic database administrator (DBA) skills
 	Anyone managing database servers
 	Database administrators managing an Oracle database for a small or
medium-sized business
This book is equally useful for enterprise DBAs. It recommends best practices and
describes efficient ways of performing administrative tasks with Oracle Enterprise
Manager as the primary interface. 







Related Documentation
For more information, see these Oracle resources:
-       Oracle Database Administrator's Guide
xvi
-       Oracle Enterprise Manager Advanced Configuration
-       Oracle Database Concepts
-       Oracle Enterprise Manager Concepts
-       Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide
-       Oracle Database SQL Language Reference
-       Oracle Database Reference
-       Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User's Guide
-       Oracle Real Application Clusters Installation Guide for Linux and UNIX or other
operating system
-       Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide
-       Oracle Clusterware Administration and Deployment Guide
-       Oracle Automatic Storage Management Administrator's Guide
-       Oracle Database Installation Guide
There are also several other 2 Day + books available for a variety of topics:
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + Security Guide
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + Data Warehousing Guide
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + Data Replication and Integration Guide
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + Performance Tuning Guide
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + Real Application Clusters Guide
-       Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + .NET Developer's Guide for Microsoft Windows
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + PHP Developer's Guide
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + Application Express Developer's Guide
-       Oracle Database 2 Day + Java Developer's Guide








Many of the examples in this guide use the sample schemas, which are installed by
default when you select the Basic Installation option with an Oracle Database
installation. See Oracle Database Sample Schemas for information about how these
schemas were created and how you can use them.
To download free release notes, installation documentation, updated Oracle
documentation, white papers, or other collateral, visit the Oracle Technology Network
(OTN). You must register online before using OTN; registration is free and can be done
at









1
Introduction 1-1
1 Introduction


As a database administrator (DBA), you are responsible for the overall operation of
Oracle Database. This introductory chapter is intended to help orient you to many
common DBA tasks, to the tools available to you, and to this guide. The chapter
contains the following sections:
-       About This Guide
-       About Oracle Database
-       Common Oracle DBA Tasks
-       Tools for Administering the Database







These tasks include configuring the database, managing memory and
storage, managing users, managing database objects such as tables, performing basic
troubleshooting, creating backups for your database, performance monitoring
activities, and more.
The primary administrative interface used in this guide is Oracle Enterprise Manager
Database Control, featuring all the self-management capabilities introduced in Oracle
Database.






About Oracle Database
Oracle Database is a relational database with object and Extensible Markup Language
(XML) capabilities. In a relational database, all data is stored in two-dimensional tables
that are composed of rows and columns. Oracle Database enables you to store data,
update it, and efficiently retrieve it, with a high degree of performance, reliability, and
scalability







Oracle Database is composed of the following elements:
-       The Oracle software that you install on your host computer
-       The database, which is a collection of physical files on one or more disks
The database contains user data, metadata, and control structures. Metadata, or
data about the data, is the collection of information on disk that permits Oracle
software to manage user data. An example of metadata is the data dictionary.
Control structures (such as the control file and online redo log files) ensure the
integrity, availability, and recoverability of user data.
-       The Oracle instance, which is composed of the following:
– The background processes, which are the operating system processes or
threads that perform the work of accessing, storing, monitoring, and
recovering user data, metadata, and control files associated with the database
– The shared memory areas used by the background processes
-       Server processes that perform work on behalf of connected users and
applications, and the memory and temporary storage used by these processes
Server processes parse and execute SQL statements, and retrieve and return results
to the user or application.
-       Oracle Net, which is a software layer that enables client applications and Oracle
Database to communicate over a network, and the Oracle Net listener, which is a
process that listens for connection requests from the network.




Oracle Database Administrator's Guide









Common Oracle DBA Tasks
As an Oracle DBA, you can expect to be involved in the following tasks:
-       Installing Oracle software
-       Creating Oracle databases
-       Performing upgrades of the database and software to new release levels
-       Starting and shutting down the database instance
-       Managing the storage structures of the database
-       Managing users and security
-       Managing database objects, such as tables, indexes, and views
-       Backing up the database and performing recovery operations when necessary
-       Monitoring the state of the database and taking preventive or corrective action as
required
-       Monitoring and tuning database performance
-       Diagnosing and reporting critical errors to Oracle Support Services
In a small to medium-sized database environment, you might be the sole person
performing these tasks. In large, enterprise environments, the job is often divided
among several DBAs, each of whom has a specialty, such as database security or
database tuning.









Tools for Administering the Database
The goal of this guide is to enable you to quickly and efficiently create an Oracle
database, and to provide guidance in basic database administration.
The following are some products, tools, and utilities you can use to achieve your goals
as a database administrator:
■ Oracle Universal Installer
Oracle Universal Installer (OUI) is a utility that installs your Oracle software and
options. It can automatically start Oracle Database Configuration Assistant to
install a database.
■ Oracle Database Configuration Assistant

Oracle Database Configuration Assistant (DBCA) is a utility that creates a
database from templates that are supplied by Oracle, or you can create your own.
It enables you to copy a preconfigured seed database, thus saving the time and
effort of generating and customizing a new database.



■ Database Upgrade Assistant
The Database Upgrade Assistant is a tool that guides you through the upgrade of
your existing database to a new Oracle Database release.
■ Net Configuration Assistant
Net Configuration Assistant (NETCA) is a utility that enables you to configure
listeners and naming methods, which are critical components of the Oracle
Database network.
■ Oracle Enterprise Manager Database Control
The primary product for managing your database is Oracle Enterprise Manager
Database Control (Database Control), a Web-based interface. After you have
installed the Oracle Database software, created or upgraded a database, and
configured the network, you can use Database Control to manage your database.
Database Control also provides an interface for performance advisors and for
Oracle utilities such as SQL*Loader and Recovery Manager (RMAN).
Oracle also offers separately licensed Oracle Enterprise Manager management
packs, management plug-ins, and other products you can purchase to enhance the
capabilities of Oracle Enterprise Manager in specific environments.
See Also:
■ Oracle Database Licensing Information









Installing Oracle Database and Creating a
Database





To install your Oracle Database software, use Oracle Universal Installer (OUI). OUI is a
graphical user interface utility that enables you to install new Oracle Database
software. Online Help is available to guide you through the installation process.
During the installation process, you are given the opportunity to create a database. If
you choose to do so, then OUI automatically starts Oracle Database Configuration
Assistant (DBCA) to guide you through the process of creating and configuring a
database.
Before you start the installation process, see the following sections for information
about prerequisites and installation choices:
■ Checking Prerequisites
■ Deciding on Installation Choices
If you do not create a database during installation, then you must run DBCA at some
point after installation to create a database.






Note: After you create a database, either during installation or as a
standalone operation, you do not have to create another. Each Oracle
instance works with a single database only. Rather than requiring that
you create multiple databases to accommodate different applications,
Oracle Database uses a single database, and accommodates multiple
applications by enabling you to separate data into different schemas
within the single database. See "About User Accounts" on page 7-1 for
more information about schemas.







Checking Prerequisites
Before installing the software, OUI performs several automated checks to ensure that
your computer fulfills the basic hardware and software requirements for an Oracle
Database installation. If your computer does not meet a requirement, then an error
message is displayed. The requirements may vary depending upon the type of
computer and operating system you are using, but some prerequisites include:



■ There is a minimum of 1 GB of physical memory.
■ Sufficient paging space is available.
■ The appropriate service packs or patches for your operating system are installed.
■ An appropriate file system format is being used.




See Also:
■ Oracle Database Installation Guide for your platform for more
information about exact requirements




Deciding on Installation Choices


Oracle Universal Installer guides you through an interview phase where you specify
your choices for installation and database creation. The exact sequence of steps
depends on your operating system. As you progress through the installation, you are
presented with choices on how to configure the database.
■ Install Options
■ Installation Method
■ Installation Type
■ Software Installation Directories
■ Database File Location
■ Database Identifiers
■ About Advanced Installation






Install Options
You can choose to create and configure a database, or to only install the database
software.
You can create a preconfigured database or a custom-configured database during
installation. If you choose not to create a database during installation, then you must
run DBCA after installation to create a database.
Preconfigured databases are based on templates that Oracle provides or that you
create. Each Oracle-provided template is optimized for a particular workload type. See 






Installation Method


The installation methods are divided into Desktop Class and Server Class:
■ Desktop Class—This installation class is most appropriate for laptop or desktop
computers. It includes a starter database and requires minimal configuration.
■ Server Class—This installation class is for servers, such as you would find in a
data center, or used to support enterprise-level applications. Choose this
installation class if you need access to advanced configuration options.
During a Desktop Class installation, you make only basic choices. For a Server Class
installation, you choose either typical installation (where you make only basic choices)
or advanced installation.
During a Desktop Class or a typical installation, Oracle Database automatically installs
the sample schemas.








Installation Type
When you install Oracle Database during basic and advanced installations, you need
answers for the questions listed in this section. OUI provides default values for every
choice.




■ What type of database edition installation do you want to perform?
Your choices are:
– Enterprise Edition—This installation type is the full-featured Oracle Database
product that provides data management for enterprise-level applications. It is
intended for mission-critical, high-security online transaction processing
(OLTP) and data warehousing environments.
– Standard Edition—This installation type is suitable for workgroup or
department-level applications, and for small to medium-sized enterprises. It
provides core relational database management services and options and
includes an integrated set of management tools, replication, Web features, and
facilities for building business-critical applications.
– Standard One Edition—This installation type is suitable for workgroup,
department, or web applications. It provides core relational database
management services for single-server environments or highly distributed
branch environments. Oracle Standard Edition One includes all the facilities
necessary to build business-critical applications.
– Personal Edition (Microsoft Windows operating systems only)—This
installation type installs the same software as the Enterprise Edition, but
supports only a single-user, development and deployment environment.
■ What are your database configuration options?






Software Installation Directories
You must specify the directory in which the Oracle Database software is installed, or
the location where the product binary files are copied from the installation media. You
must choose a location that has enough disk space to contain the software and is
accessible by the operating system user performing the installation.
You also specify the location of the Oracle base directory, which is used by all Oracle
software products installed on the server. The first time you install Oracle Database
software on a server, you are prompted to specify the location of the inventory
directory, called oraInventory. This directory provides a centralized inventory of all
Oracle software products installed on the server. You should use the same value for
the Oracle inventory directory each time you perform an Oracle software installation
on the server







Database File Location
A database includes several files that store the user data, database metadata, and
information required to recover from failures. As an administrator, you decide what
kind of storage subsystem to use for these files. You can select from the following
options:
■ File System—This default option creates database files that are managed by the
file system of your operating system. You can specify the directory path where
database files are to be stored. Oracle Database can create and manage the actual
files.
If you are not certain about which option to use, then select File System (the
default).
■ Automatic Storage Management—This option enables you to place your data files
in Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM) disk groups. If you
choose Oracle ASM, then Oracle Database automatically manages database file
placement and naming. For environments with a large number of disks, this
option simplifies database administration and maximizes performance. Oracle
ASM performs software striping and mirroring at the file level for maximum
storage flexibility, performance, and availability.
Oracle ASM uses an Oracle ASM instance, which is distinct from the database
instance, to configure and manage disk groups. A single Oracle ASM instance can
provide storage for multiple databases on the same server.
For more information, see "About Oracle Automatic Storage Management" on
page A-1 and Oracle Automatic Storage Management Administrator's Guide.







Database Identifiers
These options include your global database name and system identifier (SID). The SID
is a unique identifier that is used to distinguish this instance from other Oracle
Database instances that you may create later and run concurrently on your system.










The global database name is the full name of the database that uniquely distinguishes
it from any other database. The global database name is in the form
database_name.database_domain, for example sales.example.com. The
database name portion sales is a simple name you call your database. The database
domain portion example.com specifies the database domain in which the database is
located. Together, the database name and domain form the global database name.






About Advanced Installation
During advanced installations using the Server Class method you are prompted to
make the additional choices listed in this section, and the choices for a typical
installation. The installation process provides default values for every choice.
This guide describes, but does not document, these additional advanced installation
choices. For more information, see Oracle Database Installation Guide for your platform.





This guide describes, but does not document, these additional advanced installation
choices. For more information, see Oracle Database Installation Guide for your platform.
■ Product Languages
You choose which language the software should use after it is installed. You can
select multiple languages. The default value is English. If you choose a value other
than English, it does not change the language used by the installation.
■ Database Configuration Type
You select a template to use when configuring the database. You can choose either
either General Purpose/Transaction Processing or Data Warehousing.
■ Database Configuration Options
You can choose how to configure the database created by the installer. You can
select the memory size and management options, the character sets used to store
data, the security options for database access, and whether the sample schemas
should be installed.
To complete the exercises in this guide and related course material, you must
install the sample schemas. This data is also used in most examples throughout
Oracle Database documentation. Oracle recommends that you install the sample
schemas.
This choice is a configuration option only during advanced installation. Sample
schemas are installed by default during typical or Desktop class installations.
■ Database Management Options
You specify whether to manage your database centrally or locally using Oracle
Enterprise Manager. Central management enables you to manage multiple targets,
such as databases and application servers, using a single interface. Using local
management you can manage only a single database instance at a time.
To use central management, you must have an Oracle Enterprise Management
agent on each host, or computer that has Oracle Database software installed on it.
These agents are responsible for monitoring all components on that host. If an
agent is not found on the local host, then this option is disabled during
installation.
If you are setting up a single database for the first time, then it is recommended
that you configure local management with Oracle Enterprise Manager, which is
the default. You can later install additional databases and configure central
management using Enterprise Manager.
■ Recovery Options
Installing Oracle Database Software
2-6 Oracle Database 2 Day DBA
You specify whether automated backups should be configured for the database. If
you choose this option, you must specify whether the recovery area should be
stored on the local file system or in an Oracle ASM disk group. You must also
specify the operating system credentials the backup job uses when performing
backups



Schema Passwords
When you create a database, certain administrative user accounts are created
automatically. You are prompted to enter the passwords for the SYS, SYSTEM,
SYSMAN, and DBSNMP accounts, which enable you to manage and administer the
database. You can use the same password for each account, or specify passwords
for each account individually. If you do not enter a secure password, you will
receive a warning message during installation.
■ Operating System Groups
Administrative access to the database is granted by membership in certain
operating system groups. You can choose the operating system group to be used
for SYSDBA access (typically dba) and SYSOPER access (typically oper).
The SYSDBA group identifies operating system user accounts that have database
administrative privileges and can log in with SYSDBA access. The SYSOPER
group is an optional group for users that should have limited database
administrative privileges. See "SYSDBA and SYSOPER System Priv



To use Oracle ASM for recovery area storage, you must have
installed Oracle ASM as part of an Oracle grid infrastructure
installation and created one or more disk groups before performing
the Oracle Database installation.




Administrative access to the database is granted by membership in certain
operating system groups. You can choose the operating system group to be used
for SYSDBA access (typically dba) and SYSOPER access (typically oper).
The SYSDBA group identifies operating system user accounts that have database
administrative privileges and can log in with SYSDBA access. The SYSOPER
group is an optional group for users that should have limited database
administrative privileges. See "SYSDBA and SYSOPER System Privileges" on
page 7-5 for more information about these groups and privileges.






Installing Oracle Database Software
Installing Oracle Database Software
This section briefly describes the steps for a desktop-class installation. Most steps are
common to all platforms and involve running the Oracle Universal Installer.
Platform-specific steps are noted. For further assistance, consult the online Help or the
Oracle Database Installation Guide for your platform





Note: The following steps describe the Oracle Universal Installer
workflow for a host computer that has no previous Oracle software
installed. If your host computer has Oracle software installed, then
you may see a different workflow.








To perform a basic installation:
1. Log on to your computer as a member of the administrative group that is
authorized to install Oracle Database software and to create and run the database.
Refer to your operating system-specific documentation or contact your system
administrator to determine whether you have the necessary privileges and
permissions to install new software.
2. Do one of the following:
■ If you are installing from distribution media, then insert the distribution
media for the database into your computer.








Creating and Managing a Database with DBCA

Unless you specified that only the Oracle Database software should be installed,
Oracle Universal Installer automatically runs Database Configuration Assistant
(DBCA) after software installation is complete. DBCA then creates a database using
the information you provided. If you do not create a starter database and later want to
create one, or to create additional databases, use DBCA.
Note: With Oracle Database, you typically have a single database
that hosts multiple applications. You do not need multiple databases
to run different applications. Instead, you separate the objects that
support each different application into different schemas in the same
database. However, there may be situations in which you want to
create multiple Oracle databases on the same host computer. When
you do this with DBCA, the new databases typically use the same
Oracle home directory as the first database, but store database data
files separately from those of the first database.







DBCA also enables you to modify a database configuration, delete a database, and
more. This section describes the following DBCA tasks:
■ Starting DBCA
■ Creating a Database Using DBCA
■ Changing the Configuration of a Database Using DBCA
■ Deleting a Database Using DBCA
■ Managing Templates with DBCA
Online Help is available by clicking Help. It provides information that guides you in
selecting configuration options. 







DBCA also enables you to modify a database configuration, delete a database, and
more. This section describes the following DBCA tasks:
■ Starting DBCA
■ Creating a Database Using DBCA
■ Changing the Configuration of a Database Using DBCA
■ Deleting a Database Using DBCA
■ Managing Templates with DBCA
Online Help is available by clicking Help. It provides information that guides you in
selecting configuration options. 





Starting DBCA
Note: If you choose to create a starter database while installing the
Oracle Database software, then OUI automatically starts DBCA.




To start DBCA:
1. Log on to your computer as a member of the administrative group that is
authorized to install Oracle Database software and to create and run the database.
2. Do one of the following:
■ To start DBCA on a Microsoft Windows operating system, click Start, select
Programs (or All Programs), then Oracle - HOME_NAME, then
Configuration and Migration Tools, and then Database Configuration
Assistant.
■ To start DBCA on UNIX or Linux, or at the command-line prompt on the
Windows operating system, enter the following command:
dbca
The dbca utility is typically located in the ORACLE_HOME/bin directory.
3. Click Next to bypass the Welcome window.














 Getting Started with Database
Administration 













Administering the Database with SQL-Based Management Tools



In addition to using the graphical user interface (GUI) pages presented in Database
Control, you can use other Oracle tools such as SQL Developer and SQL*Plus to
administer your database. These tools enable you to perform database management
operations, and to query, insert, update, or delete data directly in the database. 




The following sections provide details:
■ About SQL
■ About SQL*Plus
■ Starting SQL*Plus and Connecting to the Database
■ About SQL Developer


See Also:
■ Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide
■ Oracle Database SQL Language Reference




About SQL
To perform many of its operations, Oracle Enterprise Manager Database Control
(Database Control) submits structured query language (SQL) statements to the
database. SQL (pronounced like sequel) is an industry-standard English-like computer
programming language for querying and updating databases.
The following is an example of a SQL query that lists information about countries in a
countries table, which is owned by user hr:
SELECT COUNTRY_ID, COUNTRY_NAME FROM HR.COUNTRIES;
SQL is a powerful language that can also be used to perform a variety of database
administration tasks. The following SQL statement creates the database user nick and
assigns him a password of your choosing, represented by password:
CREATE USER nick IDENTIFIED BY password;
When performing an administrative task in Database Control, you can click Show
SQL to see the SQL statements that Database Control generates and submits.






About SQL
To perform many of its operations, Oracle Enterprise Manager Database Control
(Database Control) submits structured query language (SQL) statements to the
database. SQL (pronounced like sequel) is an industry-standard English-like computer
programming language for querying and updating databases.
The following is an example of a SQL query that lists information about countries in a
countries table, which is owned by user hr:
SELECT COUNTRY_ID, COUNTRY_NAME FROM HR.COUNTRIES;
SQL is a powerful language that can also be used to perform a variety of database
administration tasks. The following SQL statement creates the database user nick and
assigns him a password of your choosing, represented by password:









CREATE USER nick IDENTIFIED BY password;



CREATE USER nick IDENTIFIED BY oracle;






About SQL*Plus
SQL*Plus is a command-line program that you use to submit SQL and PL/SQL
statements to an Oracle database. You can submit statements interactively or as
SQL*Plus scripts. SQL*Plus is installed with the database and is located in your
ORACLE_HOME/bin directory.
You can start SQL*Plus from the command line, or on Microsoft Windows, from the
Start menu.
When SQL*Plus loads, it issues the SQL prompt, which looks like this:
SQL>
At the SQL prompt, you can enter statements that perform administrative tasks such
as shutting down the database or creating a new user, or you can query, insert, update,
and delete data.
You can enter a single SQL statement on multiple lines. You must end each statement
with a semicolon (;). For most statements, you can rerun a statement by entering a
slash (/) on a line by itself.







Starting SQL*Plus and Connecting to the Database



The section describes how to start SQL*Plus and connect to the database from both the
command line and the Windows start menu.
For a new installation, you connect to the database using either the SYS or SYSTEM
database accounts. When you enter SYS or a slash (/) as the user name and provide
the AS SYSDBA clause, your access is authenticated using operating system
authentication. Operating system authentication uses your Windows, UNIX, or Linux
host user account to authenticate you to Oracle Database. You must have logged in to
the host computer with a user account that is a member of a special host user group.
On UNIX and Linux, this user group is typically dba. This type of authentication 





To start SQL*Plus and connect to the database from the command line:
1. Open a command window.
2. Configure the operating system environment variables, as described in
"Configuring the Operating System Environment Variables".
3. Start SQL*plus using a command in the following format:
sqlplus {username | /} [as sysdba]
An example of this command is the following:
$ sqlplus / AS SYSDBA
Enter password: password
For username, you can use the SYS or SYSTEM administrative users. At the
prompt, enter the password that you set up during installation. If you use the SYS
user, you must include AS SYSDBA after the username.
SQL*Plus connects you to the default database instance (Microsoft Windows) or
the database instance specified by environment variables (Linux and UNIX).


